So we want to create a full HTML page to the user.
Now we can do that by creating a new folder maybe, views as a typical name but you can name it however
you want where you store all your HTML files you want to send back, though we'll not actually create
a HTML file in there but instead a template which contains HTML content but where we can also
inject dynamic content so that we can have a mixture of HTML static content and dynamic content,
this will be all then merged together into HTML file on the server side and sent back to the
client,
so on the client we will receive an HTML file but it allows us to enrich this HTML file with dynamic
content and for that, we need a package, a library that allows us to define such a template which then
parses the template file and finds a special syntax in there which we can use to output dynamic content
and that makes working with such a template easier
and for that I'll install such a package and that's the ejs package.
Now there are alternatives to that and in my Node.js course for example, I dive way deeper into that
but here we can use this ejs package which is quite popular and quite straightforward to use.
So here we can just npm install this package as an extra library and now we need to tell Express.js, which
supports such templating engines as they are called, that we want to use this templating engine and we
do tell Express us if we want to do that by calling the set method on the app object which allows us
to set up some global options and there we want to set the view engine option with a whitespace between
the two words to ejs, which tells Express that the engine for parssing our
views, our template should be ejs, the package we just installed and then we also tell Express.js
where it finds our views and for that we add a views setting and point at the folder that
holds our view files and in my case, that's views
but if you named that folder differently, you would have to change it here. Now with that, we can add such
a template here and I'll add an index file in here with the extension ejs.
This means that ejs, this package we just installed will be able to detect this file and parse it.
Now in there you generally just write HTML code as you're used to it but you can add a special
syntax which the ejs package understands to inject dynamic content. So let's generate a HTML file
in here and in vs code, you can just type HTML and pick this HTML5 option and hit enter and it
gives you a basic skeleton. Now here I'll just use Node.js demo as a title and then here in the body, we can
output the content we want to show and it could be a h1 tag where I say hello
and then here I want to have something dynamic, I'll come back to that and below that I want to have
my form. So I'll grab this code here from app.js and output that below the h1 tag and autoformat it,
so now we have does in a way more readable way.
Now I want to output the user name here dynamically and for that, we can use a special syntax which ejs,
this package, understands and you can of course learn all about the supported syntax features either
in my Node.js course where I cover this as well or in the ejs documentation, here I just want to use
one of the most basic features with an angle bracket and then a percentage sign and then an equal sign
and a closing angle bracket and now between that, you can refer to any variable name which you plan on
providing to this view and I'll come back to how we provide that in a second. So here I'll point at user,
you could use user name here, it doesn't matter, I'll take user here and now we have this special syntax
in here. This is of course not regular HTML but instead this is simply a syntax understood by the ejs
package when it later parses this file. Now to tell ejs to parse this file, we need to make sure
that we don't set back a response like this but instead here, I want to render a view as a response and
for that, the response object has a render method, also added by Express.js, this does not exist in pure
Node.js.
The render method takes a couple of arguments and the first argument is the name of the view you want
to render and in my case, that's index because I have the index.ejs file in the views folder. You don't
need to specify the path because we set the views folder to be the folder that holds our views up there.
So now here, index also no extensions required because we told Express that we use ejs and that will
automatically look for a .ejs extension and therefore we can continue with the second argument and
that would be an object full of properties or full of data we want to provide to this template and here
we should provide a user property because that will be the data ejs then can use when it parses this
template.
So here I will set a user key and set this to user name, so to this value and with that, we got a setup
where now we should render this file and have our dynamic content in there.
So if we now save this and we restart our server and we go into our URL and hit enter here, I
get an error,
could not find matching closing tag,
Yes because here a little mistake,
the closing tag also should start with a percentage sign, so it's closing tag percentage angled bracket,
so just like the opening tag but without the equal sign.
So now with that if we restart the server and we now hit enter here again, this looks good
and now if we enter something here, click send,
we see that.
So now this is working with the help of our template.
Now of course you can render way more than just this single output there,
you could have multiple such dynamic pieces as long as you provide all the data to the view here and
you can also do more complex tasks, like loop through a list of data or render content conditionally,
I covered that in my Node.js course and the official ejs docs which you find attached of course also
are a great place to dive deeper.
Important to understand is that if you inspect this in the browser, you of course get normal HTML code
which is rendered here, also in the response if we have a look at that in the preview, in the response here
I mean sorry,
you'll see you get a normal HTML code.
We have no dynamic part here because this dynamic segment is filled on the server, on the server
we on the fly generate a HTML document which is then appended to the outgoing response.
That's what the view engine does here.